journalist kareim elari joins me now
from Ciro welcome back to DW kareim what
are your contacts telling you about the
situation in
Rafa well I looked and listened the
whole day to interviews a local
cameraman made for us in and around the
Rafa situation is really desperate of
people uh running away from there first
many of them were displaced for some of
them more than a dozen times people ran
out of money people have no idea where
to go and then when they arrive at
different locations they see these
locations are not fit to receive so many
people there is no proper infrastructure
and then I mean just imagine the hold
and caught Showers of the last 24 hours
first as you saw leaflets which told
them to leave because their home will
become a combat zone then uh
celebrations on the street because they
s the war is over and then again
military operations by Israel and now
again uh negotiations in Cairo I think
people uh quite confused about what to
think about the situation right now
understandably so the Egyptian foreign
Ministry warrn today that Israel's
operation in Rafa risks undermining the
ceasefire efforts that you just talked
about where do these truce talks in KIRO
stand and what are the calculations on
both sides
here well it seems to move because there
is a second Hamas delegation that
arrived now in Cairo and that we hear so
little about is may be a sign that they
really seriously talk about it of course
one of the main sticking points is
hamas's demand for a permanent ceasefire
and Hamas has I think more than one
calculation for this Demand on one hand
of course they know Netanyahu the prime
minister of Israel said that the goal or
the object objective of the war of the
war is to destroy Hamas so for them uh
when they still exist after the war in
some kind of form militarily or
politically that means he will have not
achieved his goals so their survival
after the war is one of their priorities
but there also there's a second priority
people in Gaza and that means no matter
if supporters of Hamas or opponents of
Hamas they don't want a ceasefire for a
few weeks and then hostages are
exchanged with Palestinian prisoners
they want an end of the war they want to
that the Israeli Army withdraws from the
Gaza Strip they want to return to their
homes and they want to start their lives
so any other result in the negotiations
will be seen by them as a disappointment
that it's something that Hamas of course
has to put into
consideration it's still Out Of Reach
though that ceasefire now that the Rafa
and Kem shalam Crossings are closed a
relief agencies are warning that
humanitarian aid for Gaza is being
choked off and I'm quoting them here
what does that mean in Practical terms
why that this is another disaster in an
already disastrous situation we know of
course that there was no sufficient Aid
coming into the Gaza Strip now the two
important border crossings are closed
and uh there's also this is one of the
reasons why people there on in around
Rafa are panicked prices for commercial
goods are already doubling so that's
really one of the things they extremely
worried about that they already Spar
Supply is going to become even less
known that was journalist Kareem El
gawari in many thanks it's always great
to get your
insights you're
welcome to keep talking about the
ceasefire negotiations and the Rafa
offensive and bring in Laura Blumenfeld
she's a Middle East analyst and a New
York Times bestselling author joins us
from Washington DC welcome good to have
you on DW as well now Laura the ball is
in Israel's Court now they openly
rejected the ceasefire proposal but
still sent a delegation to Cairo what do
you expect to come out of these
negotiations well look senoir and
Netanyahu are hardliners right they're
the anti-c compromised candidates
representing both of their people but I
think they understand that most Wars
come to a messy end um I see three
options maybe to get to that ceasefire
it's kind of been a ceasefire fever and
we're hoping it'll break for the good um
one of the biggest obstacles is trust so
if we can have someone sort of stand in
um and you know stand for the various
parties Israelis do not trust the homas
leadership they were thinking that they
were in a kind of deterrence
relationship with them before October
7th and then they were sucker punched on
that day and they won't be Fooled Again
is their attitude um and the
Palestinians don't trust the Israelis
but specifically Netanyahu and they're
asking for guarantees that the Israelis
will keep their side of the bargain
either from the United States or they're
not quite sure they're going to rely on
the United States at this point so
they're looking to Turkey and to Russia
um the second possibility is rather than
um as your as your previous uh
correspondent noted that there's this
sticking point over the end game um
right now we're involved in a blame game
but if we can get past that and talk
about okay so is it a permanent
ceasefire or is it a temporary calm if
rather than making it time based and
setting a date you make it conditions
based so that you have to meet certain
markers um for end of hostilities that
could be another way forward and finally
you know we've been focusing a lot on
incentives for Success um maybe we need
to talk about the cost of failure um a
failure to achieve a ceasefire with a
little bit more leaning heavily into the
negatives that could potentially be Doha
threatening to expel the Hamas
leadership um from Qatar and then on the
United States side look tomorrow um in
terms of leaning on Israel secretary
blinkin has to present a report to
Congress answering a very simple
question which is is Israel violating
International AAL humanitarian law in
its Onslaught in
Gaza but Israel has been very clear from
the beginning that they want to continue
their military operation until Hamas is
dismantled do you think that there is a
scenario in which a political solution
really puts an end to this
war you know I think right now um what
what Benjamin Netanyahu has always
argued in terms of politics and
diplomacy is peace through strength
let's get the military Victory and then
we can move on to the Diplomatic I think
that's part of the problem why it's
falling on deaf ears when you hear you
know various voices of Reason saying
bring us some calm and then we can look
toward the Horizon toward a two-state
solution and remember that normalization
deal with Saudi Arabia that we were
working on before October 7th that's a
big prize for Netanyahu well the
normalization deal isn't isn't sort of
jibing with him because what he's saying
is we aren't normal Israel is not the
normal Israel until we can achieve that
Sheen of deterrence that we had before
October 7th mhm but there is a lot of
pressure of course on Netanyahu because
there are still so many hostages in the
hands of Hamas and Hamas said that any
military operation um or further
offensive on Rafa would jeopardize
hostage talks do you think there's a
risk that or that this is a risk that
Israelis are willing to take in order to
achieve their military objective of
dismantling
Hamas and when thing that Netanyahu is
doing which he's famous for is strategic
dithering and sometimes we wonder if
even he knows what he's going to do next
and part of the problem is the Israeli
government is very divided um so is the
Palestinian leadership by the way I mean
there's a tremendous leadership vacuum
and that's why you see President Biden
stepping in very forcefully um to fill
that Gap um Netanyahu would argue that
you know countries don't make treaties
with the weak and when he said that he
came out with a public statement he's
actually signaling to Saudi Arabia
although the United States has said you
have to choose between this operation
and Rafa a major operation and peace
with Riad he would say quite the
opposite the road to R the road to Saudi
Arabia's respect is through Rafa because
we speak Middle East and Middle East
means might makes right so does that
mean that all the pressure coming from
from its allies as well from the US from
France doesn't make any difference to
Israel at this point
well he has said quite explicitly
actually on Holocaust Memorial Day if we
have to we will stand alone and he was
referencing World War II when he said
you know there are times when great
Powers stood idly by and I think that
was a little bit of a rib a little bit
of a jab to the United States for not
standing by or helping the UK as much as
they could have perhaps during the blitz
I mean this is all I'm interpreting his
words um you know it's a kind of With Or
Without You moment for him and yes it's
to save his own political future um but
I do think that he really believes that
if he can get back you know he's almost
like a man trying to slow walk up a down
escalator if he can make it to the top
that will justify it all and he keeps
saying a little more time I think the
way that he could potentially thread the
needle and we could get to a better
places if it's a pinpoint minor and
strategic some kind of incursion into
Rafa where there aren't Mass civilian
casualties the president of the United
States will not tolerate that he's made
that very clear then we could perhaps
get to a better day by taking the Border
sealing off the border with of Rafa to
Egypt yes he's what what he's saying
publicly nanahu is we we want to stop
the smuggling of guns and weapons into
Gaza but what I would also suspect is
for this final showdown with sinir he's
also trying to prevent the Hamas
leadership from
escaping that was Middle East analyst
Laura Blumenfeld thank you so much for
those insights great speaking to you
thank you